---
title: Fizz Buzz in Java
layout: default
last-modified: 2018-11-06
featured-image: 
tags: [java, fizz-buzz]
authors:
  - stuin
---

## Fizz Buzz in Java

Java is a very standard looking programming language, so this code may look quite familiar:

```java
public class FizzBuzz {
  public static void main(String[] args) {
    for (int i = 1; i < 101; i++) {
      String output = "";
      if (i % 3 == 0) {
        output += "Fizz";
      }
      if (i % 5 == 0) {
        output += "Buzz";
      }
      if (output.isEmpty()) {
        output += i;
      }
      System.out.println(output);
    }
  }
}
```

The rules of the problem are quite straightforward:

    If a number is divisible by 3, print the word ‘Fizz’ instead of the number. If the number is divisible by 5, print the word ‘Buzz’ instead of the number. Finally, if the number is divisible by both 3 and 5, print ‘FizzBuzz’ instead of the number. Otherwise, just print the number.

The modulo operator will let us easily check for divisibility, as it returns the remainder from a division. When i is divisible by 3, i % 3 will just be 0.
## The Function

As with any Java program, we start out with a public class, (named the same as the FizzBuzz.java file). Then inside that we set up a main function, with a array of string arguments.

public class FizzBuzz {
  public static void main(String[] args) {

The program is within that one function, so we do not need to pay any more attention to that.
## The Loop

Next we will set up the required loop, going from 1 to 100. We can use a simple for loop to achieve that.

```java
    for (int i = 1; i < 101; i++) {
```

The first part of it is a variable, int i stores a number and is started at 1. The loop is then set to run repeatedly until i is greater than 100. Finally i++ means that every time the loop is run, i will increase by 1.
## Control Flow

Each time the loop runs, it will first create a blank String to hold the output (This just stores a list of characters for later display).

```java
      String output = "";
```

Each if statement will then check for divisibility and add to the output variable.

```java
      if (i % 3 == 0) { 
        output += "Fizz"; 
      } 
      if (i % 5 == 0) { 
        output += "Buzz"; 
      } 
      if (output.isEmpty()) { 
        output += i; 
      } 
```

If i is divisible by 3, add Fizz, then if i is divisible by 5 add Buzz. Notice that there is no else statement, so both of them can run consecutively. This also uses Java's handy ability to just add two strings together and attach one to the end of the other. If the output is still blank after the first if statements, then put the number there instead.
## The Output

Finally we have a long statement to put that output onto the screen.

```java
      System.out.println(output);
    }
  }
}
```

This references a standard library function, and can be used at any time to output text. The ln at the end means that after the output variable is printed it will be followed by a newline, allowing the next loop to follow.

It should also be noted that 3 curly-braces follow, to close the for loop, the function and the class respectively. The indenting is just a standard thing added for clarity.
## How to Run the Solution

First we will need to grab the latest version of java, particularly the Java Development Kit (JDK). Next we need to save the code into a file named FizzBuzz.java. Finally, in the folder with the code, we shall run the commands:

```console
javac FizzBuzz.java
java FizzBuzz
```

There are plenty of online compilers available as well. 