## How to Implement the Solution
We return to the Swift programming language with that old chestnut, Fizz Buzz. According to urban legend, Fizz Buzz is frequently used on job interviews to test if the candidate can code (I've never been so lucky).

To review: Fizz Buzz tests basic mastery of programming concepts such as conditionals and loops. It involves printing out the word "Fizz" if a number is divisible by 3, and the word "Buzz" if a number is divisible by 5. If the number is divisible by both 3 and 5, we print the word "FizzBuzz". If it not divisible by 3 or 5, we print the number itself. 

The result should look something like like this:

```
1, 2, Fizz, 4, Buzz, Fizz, 7, 8, Fizz, Buzz, 11, Fizz, 13, 14, FizzBuzz
```

So, without any further adieu, let's get into the code!

## The Solution
```
func fizzBuzz(start: Int = 1, end: Int = 100) -> Void {
    let range = start...end
    
    for number in range {
        guard number % 5 == 0 || number % 3 == 0 else {
            print(number)
            continue
        }
        
        var fizzAndOrBuzz = ""
        
        if number % 3 == 0 {
            fizzAndOrBuzz = "Fizz"
        }
        
        if number % 5 == 0 {
            fizzAndOrBuzz += "Buzz"
        }
        
        print(fizzAndOrBuzz)
    }
}

fizzBuzz();
```

### The Function Signature
Here we see a rather long and punctuation-filled function signature. Swift functions use named parameters, and the type of each parameter must be noted. This is a safety feature, ensuring that we don't pass in a float when we need an integer. So, in line 1, we see `start: Int` and `end: Int`, meaning that our function takes in two integer values, named `start` and `end`.

### Default Arguments
You might think that the equal signs next to each parameter look like assignments, and you would be (sort of) correct. When writing a Swift function's signature, the equals sign can be used to define a default value. If later, the user chooses to call the function without passing in any arguments, the compiler will be smart enough to look at the defaults, and run the function using those values. Swift functions don't *need* to have default arguments, but they can be nice to have if you know that you'll be frequently using certain values. They can also save you some headaches when building apps.

### The Return Type
The little arrow after the argument names indicates the return type, which in this case is `Void`. `Void` just means our function doesn't return anything. Our function is only printing out words and numbers, so it isn't returning any values.

### Ranges
On line 2, we use the keyword `let` to define a new range of numbers:

```
let range = start...end
```

In Swift, values defined with `let` are immutable, and we are encouraged to use them liberally. This keeps us from accidentally changing something when we don't want or need to.

Ranges are their own type in Swift, and allow us to go over a series of numbers without setting up a list or array. Although we could have explicitly named the type here, the Swift compiler is able to infer that we want a range because we've given it two integer values, separated by an ellipsis.

We create a for-loop to transverse the range on line 4. Earlier versions of Swift allowed for C-style loops, but they've since been replaced with this less wordy syntax.

### Conditionals
Line 5 presents a guard statement, a kind of conditional that only fires if a condition has not been met. Guard statements are frequently used in Swift to handle edge cases that might otherwise cause errors, and to avoid nested conditionals. Here, we use a guard statement to swiftly print any numbers that are not divisible by 3 or 5. Then, we continue on to the next number.

If a number *is* indeed divisible by 3 or 5, we set up the variable `fizzAndOrBuzz`. This value is defined with the keyword `var`, which allows us to change it over the course of our function.

We use two if-statements to test for Fizziness and/or Buzziness. Both statements use the modulo operator `%`, which gives us the remainder from any division between one integer and another. If one number is evenly divisible by another, the remainder is always 0.

### Wrapping Up
Line 14 uses `+=` to add "Buzz" on to the end of our variable, so that if our number is evenly divisible by both 3 and 5, we get the word "FizzBuzz", and not just "Fizz" or just "Buzz".

Finally, we print whatever is inside `fizzAndOrBuzz` at the end of our loop.

We exit the loop, we end the function, and we call `fizzBuzz` at the very bottom. Since we've defined some default parameters, the script knows to go over the numbers 1 through 100 without having to be told to. We could also pass in arguments for the start and end of our range later, if we want.

## How to Run the Solution
Swift is often run via XCode, Apple's IDE, or by installing Swift on Linux. However, XCode in particular is a heavy download, so unless you already have it installed, or are seriously contemplating iOS development, you probably should use this handy online Swift compiler.

Please be aware that Swift updates very frequently, and many online compilers use earlier versions of the language, which may present with incompatibilities and errors when trying to run this code. This code was written in Swift4.