---
title: Selection Sort in Python
layout: default
last-modified: 2019-01-10
featured-image: selection-sort-in-python-featured-image.JPEG
tags: [python, selection-sort]
authors:
  - hmajid2301
---
  
In this article, we'll be tackling Selection Sort in Python.

## How to Implement the Solution

At this point, let's dig into the code a bit. The following sections break
down the Selection Sort in Python functionality.

### Solution

```python
#!/usr/bin/env python
import sys


def selection_sort(xs, sorted_xs=None):
    sorted_xs = sorted_xs or []
    if len(xs) <= 0:
        return sorted_xs
    x = min(xs)
    sorted_xs.append(x)
    xs.remove(x)
    return selection_sort(xs, sorted_xs)


def input_list(list_str):
    return [int(x.strip(" "), 10) for x in list_str.split(',')]


def exit_with_error():
    print('Usage: please provide a list of at least two integers to sort in the format “1, 2, 3, 4, 5”')
    sys.exit(1)


def main(args):
    try:
        xs = input_list(args[0])
        if len(xs) <= 1:
            exit_with_error()
        print(selection_sort(xs))
    except (IndexError,ValueError):
        exit_with_error()


if __name__ == "__main__":
    main(sys.argv[1:])
```

### main()

Breaking down this solution bottom up,

```python
if __name__ == "__main__":
    main(sys.argv[1:])
```

This bit of code checks to see if this is the main module run. If it is it then calls the main function and passes user input to it.
In this case the user input would be a string of numbers like so `"2, 1, 10, 5, 3"` (to sort).

```python
def main(args):
    try:
        xs = input_list(args[0])
        if len(xs) <= 1:
            exit_with_error()
        print(selection_sort(xs))
    except (IndexError,ValueError):
        exit_with_error()
```

This is the main function of this file. It parses the input, then calls our selection sort function (and prints the results).
It also deals with any errors raised.

### input_list()

```python
def input_list(list_str):
    return [int(x.strip(" "), 10) for x in list_str.split(',')]
```

This function takes a string like `"2, 1, 10, 5, 3"`, and turns into a list of numbers. It does this using a list comprehension, first we need to convert
our string into a list `list_str.split(',')` which is a list of strings split by comma (,). So our original input string becomes `["2", " 1", " 10", " 5", " 3"]`.
Then for each element in the list `for x in ...` ,  we do something to it.

In this example we convert it into a decimal integer, `int(x.strip(" "), 10)`
`x.strip(" ")`, removes any whitespace so `" 1"` becomes `"1"`, then `int("1", 10)` converts the string `"1"` into a decimal number in this case very simply `1`. This is done
for every item in the list so our original input of `"2, 1, 10, 5, 3"` becomes `[2, 1, 10, 5, 3]`.

### exit_with_error()

```python
def exit_with_error():
    print('Usage: please provide a list of at least two integers to sort in the format “1, 2, 3, 4, 5”')
    sys.exit(1)
```

This function simply prints a message and then exits the script with an error, `sys.exit(1)`. If any non-zero value is returned then the program didn't complete properly.
This function is called if the user input isn't correct.

### selection_sort()

```python
def selection_sort(xs, sorted_xs=None):
    sorted_xs = sorted_xs or []
    if len(xs) <= 0:
        return sorted_xs
    x = min(xs)
    sorted_xs.append(x)
    xs.remove(x)
    return selection_sort(xs, sorted_xs)
```

Now onto the main part of the program, this is the function that actually sorts our list.
The `selection_sort()` takes two parameters `xs` which is the unsorted list and `sorted_xs` which funnily enough is the current sorted list.
When you first call the `selection_sort()` function you simply pass it your unsorted list as `sorted_xs=None` by default.

If the `sorted_xs` value is set (not `None`) then we make `sorted_xs` equal itself, else `sorted_xs` equals `[]` (an empty list).
You should never make a mutable object a default argument in Python as you get can get unexpected result. You can get more information [here](http://effbot.org/zone/default-values.htm). Therefore we set `sorted_xs=None` instead of `sorted_xs=[]`.

Then we check if xs is empty (`<=0`), which would mean we have sorted every element, then we simply return the `sorted_xs` which is the sorted this.
We can do this because as we sort element we move them from `xs` to `sorted_xs` ( items get removed from the `xs` list).

If `xs` still has items then that means we haven't completely sorted the list. We found the smallest value in `x = min(xs)`,
We append that value to `sorted_xs` and then we remove it from the `xs` list. Finally, we call the selection sort function with
the new `xs` and `sorted_xs` values. This repeats until `xs` is empty and you are left with a completely sorted `sorted_xs`.

Taking a look at a simple example where we want to sort `[5, 1, 3]`.

1st 

* Call `selection_sort([5, 1, 3])`
* `xs = [5, 1, 3]`, `sorted_xs=[]`
* Minimum value is `1`
* `xs = [5, 3]`, `sorted_xs = [1]`
* `selection_sort([5, 3], [1])`

2nd

* `xs = [5, 3]`, `sorted_xs = [1]`
* Minimum value is `3`
* `xs = [5]`, `sorted_xs = [1, 3]`
* `selection_sort([5], [1, 3])`

3rd

* `xs = [5]`, `sorted_xs = [1, 3]`
* Minimum value is `5`
* `xs = []`, `sorted_xs = [1, 3, 5]`
* `selection_sort([], [1, 3, 5])`

4th

* `xs = []`, `sorted_xs = [1, 3, 5]`
* `len(xs) <= 0`, as we have 0 elements
* So we return `sorted_xs = [1, 3, 5]`

## How to Run Solution

If we want to run this program, we should probably download a copy of [Selection Sort in Python](https://github.com/TheRenegadeCoder/sample-programs/blob/ca7a3cb1fff4cf3c19958695b5f7b85ae76806d5/archive/p/python/selection-sort.py).
After that, we should make sure we have the latest Python interpreter. From there, we can simply run the following command in the terminal:

`python selection-sort.py "3, 2, 10, 6, 1, 7"`

Alternatively, we can copy the solution into an online Python interpreter and hit run.

---