---
title: Hello World in Red
layout: default
last-modified: 2020-05-02
featured-image:
tags: [red, hello-world]
authors:
  - the_renegade_coder
---

In this article, we'll demonstrate how to implement Hello World in Red.

## How to Implement the Solution

Anyway, let’s get right to our implementation of Hello World in Red:

```red
Red [Title: "Hello World in Red"]

print "Hello, World!"
```

Well, that’s just about it. Honestly, this is about the weirdest syntax 
I’ve ever seen, so I really had to dig into the docs.

[According to Helpin’Red][1], the first line in our solution is the header, 
and it’s absolutely necessary for all scripts. The header is composed of two 
parts: the Red keyword and the block.

Now, every script will have the Red keyword. As for the block, well, that 
will vary per script. Honestly, the information in that block is largely 
optional, but it can be used to declare script information such as a title, 
a description, a version, and an author. In this case, I simply gave the 
script a title.

In addition to arbitrary information, the first block can also be used to 
import libraries. For example, we could have implemented Hello World in 
Red as a GUI:

```red
Red [needs: 'view]

view [
  text "Hello, World!"
]
```

Here, we use the header block to import the graphics view library. Then, 
we use that library to display a window containing “Hello, World!”

At any rate, the last line in our original implementation clearly prints 
“Hello, World!” to the user. We’ve seen this plenty of times already so 
no need to dig into it.

## How to Run the Solution

If we’re looking to run this solution, perhaps the easiest way to do so 
is to [download the latest Red toolchain][2]. Of course, we’ll also want 
to grab a copy of the [Hello World script from GitHub][3].

Now, drop both of those files in the same folder and run the following:

```console
red hello-world.red
```

If you’re a Windows user, you may need to call the executable directly.

In addition, we can compile our script using the following command:

```console
red -c hello-world.red
```

At this point, I would usually share some online editor you could use to test 
code, but Red doesn’t appear to have one. If one exists, let me know in 
the comments.

---

#### References

[^1]: J. Grifski, “Hello World in Red,” The Renegade Coder, 24-April-2018. [Online]. Available: <https://therenegadecoder.com/code/hello-world-in-red/>. [Accessed: 17-Nov-2018].


[1]: http://helpin.red/
[2]: https://www.red-lang.org/p/download.html
[3]: https://github.com/jrg94/sample-programs/blob/master/archive/r/red/hello-world.red
