---
title: Hello World in ALGOL 68
layout: default
last-modified: 2020-05-02
featured-image: hello-world-in-algol-68-featured-image.JPEG
tags: [algol68, hello-world]
authors:
  - the_renegade_coder
---

Welcome back to another installment in the Hello World in Every Language series. 
Today, we’re tackling Hello World in ALGOL 68.

## How to Implement the Solution

Without further ado, let’s implement Hello World in ALGOL 68:

```algol
printf(($gl$, "Hello, World!"))
```

Now, I believe we can actually shorten this implementation to look identical to the 
[Python implementation][1]. But, that wouldn’t be too interesting. Instead, we opted 
to use a *printf* solution to show off a couple of features.

If you’re unfamiliar with *printf*, it’s typically a version of the print function 
which allows for string formatting. Unfortunately, that’s about where the similarities 
end. In ALGOL 68, the syntax for formatting text is about as bizarre as I’ve ever seen. 
Luckily, we have a simple example: `$gl$`.

In this example, everything between the dollar signs is considered a format string. 
In this case, we have two characters: *g* and *l*.

Since we’re formatting strings, one of those tokens will be replaced by our “Hello, World!” 
string. In this case, it’s *g*. As for *l*, that’s actually the newline token — something 
we haven’t paid a lot of attention to in this series. When put together, “Hello, World!” 
will print to the console.

Another interesting bit about this program is the fact that we have double parentheses 
that almost look redundant. But make no mistake, they’re important:

```console
1     printf($gl$, "Hello, World!")
      1                            
a68g: error: 1: incorrect number of arguments for PROC ([] "SIMPLOUT") VOID (detected in particular-program).
```

To be honest, I don’t understand the error. My best guess is *printf* requires an array 
of arguments. Whereas, the *varargs* solution I’m proposing issues the format string 
and “Hello, World!” as separate arguments. Fortunately, [James Jones has a great 
explanation for this][1].

## How to Run Solution

Perhaps the easiest way to run the solution is to use an [online ALGOL 68 editor][2]. 
If we copy the solution above into the editor, we can hit execute to run it.

Alternatively, we have the option to install an ALGOL 68 interpreter. Apparently, there 
is a limited [ALGOL 68 Genie interpreter][3] which should get the job done. After all, 
it’s the same interpreter the online solution uses. Feel free to leverage the 
[documentation][4].

## Further Reading

- [Hello World in Solidity][1] on The Renegade Coder

---

#### References

[^1]: J. Grifski, “Hello World in ALGOL 68,” The Renegade Coder, 20-May-2018. [Online]. Available: <https://therenegadecoder.com/code/hello-world-in-algol-68/>. [Accessed: 31-Dec-2018].  
[1]: https://sample-programs.therenegadecoder.com/projects/hello-world/python/  
[2]: https://therenegadecoder.com/code/hello-world-in-algol-68/#comment-326  
[3]: http://www.compileonline.com/execute_algol_online.php  
[4]: http://algol68.sourceforge.net/  
[5]: https://jmvdveer.home.xs4all.nl/learning-algol-68-genie.pdf
