## How to Implement the Solution

As always, let’s get down to business with an implementation of Hello World in PHP:

<?php
  echo "Hello, World!";
?>

And, that’s it. In fact, we can shorten this implementation:

<?="Hello, World!";

I’ve read that leaving the PHP tag open in the second example is the preferred method 
for pure PHP files. At any rate, let’s dive into the code a bit.

If we use our first implementation as an example, the first thing we’ll see is a PHP 
tag. The PHP tag exists because the code is actually embedded in an HTML file. In other 
words, the PHP tag indicates to the PHP interpreter that we have code for processing. 
Otherwise, the interpreter outputs the raw text.

After that, we have a bit of PHP code which allows us to write our string to the web 
page. In this case, the print command is echo. That might sound familiar for anyone who 
has done some command line work because echo is the same command used in command line 
scripting. More on that when we get to shell scripting.

Finally, we have the closing PHP tag. This signals to the interpreter that we are done 
processing PHP code. Of course, in the second example, we omit the closing tag. This is 
done for a variety of reasons, but it’s mainly done to eliminate extra space issues after 
the tag.

## How to Run the Solution

As usual, we can run the solution using an online PHP interpreter. Just drop the code into 
the editor and hit run.

Alternatively, we have to launch up a local server, so we can view the webpage the PHP 
produces in our browser. From what I understand, a lot of people use XAMPP which is an 
all-in-one kit for PHP development.
