---
title: Hello World in Racket
layout: default
last-modified: 2019-07-01
featured-image: hello-world-in-racket-featured-image.JPEG
tags: [racket, hello-world]
authors:
  - the_renegade_coder
---

In this article, we'll take a look at Hello World in Racket!

## How to Implement the Solution

Alright, let’s go ahead and dig into our implementation of Hello World in Racket:

```racket
#lang racket/base
"Hello, World!"
```

Up first, we have this peculiar line that looks kind of like a comment in Python
or an import in C. As it turns out, the lang line specifies the language used by
the interpreter. In fact, I already mentioned that there’s a module which
provides syntax for static typing in Racket.

In this case, the language we have chosen is racket/base. This only provides us
the core Racket functionality. As an alternative, we could have easily specified
racket alone.

Finally, we have our print line. To be honest, we could have used the print
functionality:

```racket
#lang racket/base
(print "Hello, World!)
```

However, I wanted to show that you can implement Hello World without the mess of
parentheses. That’s because Racket automatically prints constants. If we had a
slightly more complicated expression:

```racket
#lang racket
+ 2 2
```

We would see the three constants returned to us in their stack order:

```racket
#<procedure:+>
2
2
```

We would need parentheses to actually evaluate this expression[^grifski_hwracket_2018].

## How to Run the Solution

At any rate, I think we’re done here. If we want to try to run the solution, we
can plug some of this code into an online Racket interpreter.

Alternatively, we can download the latest version of Racket and get a copy of
the solution. Assuming Racket is now in the path, we can just run the following
to execute Hello World in Racket:

```shell
racket hello-world.rkt
```

And, that’s it. If successful, the “Hello, World!” string should print to the console[^grifski_hwracket_2018].

---

#### References

{% include blog_reference.md reference="grifski_hwracket_2018" %}
