---
title: Hello World in Julia
layout: default
last-modified: 2019-05-01
featured-image: hello-world-in-julia-featured-image.JPEG
tags: [julia, hello-world]
authors:
  - the_renegade_coder
---

In this article, we tackle Hello World in Julia.

## How to Implement the Solution

With the background out of the way, let’s get right into our 
implementation of Hello World in Julia:

```julia
println("Hello, World!")
```

And unsurprisingly, that’s it! We can implement Hello World 
in Julia in a single line.

Despite how easy the print functionality seems in Julia, there’s 
actually a lot going on. First of all, println makes a call to 
print with an added newline character.

The print function handles any sort of IO, so we could theoretically 
pass our string to any IO stream. In this case, we leave the default 
standard output.

Regardless, print makes a call to a function named show. At that 
point, I’m not sure what happens, but I suspect there’s some C-level 
call to printf. If you know, let me know in the comments.[^1]

## How to Run the Solution

With our solution ready, we probably want to run it. Perhaps the easiest 
thing to do would be to take advantage of Julia’s online editor. 
Unfortunately, it appears sign up is required to use it, but it’s great 
for running some code snippets.

Alternatively, we can download the latest version of Julia. While we’re 
at it, we should probably get a copy of the Hello World in Julia solution. 
With everything read to go, navigate the command line to the folder 
containing the solution. Then, run the following:

```shell
julia hello-world.jl
```

That should execute the script. Don’t be afraid to leverage the Julia 
documentation if you get stuck.[^1]

---

#### References

[^1]: J. Grifski, “Hello World in Julia,” The Renegade Coder, 25-Apr-2018. [Online]. Available: <https://therenegadecoder.com/code/hello-world-in-julia/>. [Accessed: 01-May-2019].
