---
title: Hello World in Lisp
layout: default
last-modified: 2020-05-02
featured-image: hello-world-in-lisp-featured-image.JPEG
tags: [lisp, hello-world]
authors:
  - the_renegade_coder
---

In this article, we tackle Hello World in Lisp.

## How to Implement the Solution

Unfortunately, Lisp has many flavors which means the following implementation 
of Hello World will likely only be applicable to handful of those flavors:

```lisp
(format t "Hello, World!")
```

That said, I’m happy to dig into this implementation of Hello World in Lisp.

First things first, we have the format keyword. In Common Lisp, format is 
basically the equivalent to printf in C. It basically takes some string and 
outputs it to some destination.

That brings us to this mysterious letter t. According to gigamonkeys, t is 
actually the destination of the output. More specifically, t indicates standard 
output. Another option is NIL which causes the string to be returned.

Finally, we have our Hello World string. This is obviously what gets printed 
to standard output.

## How to Run the Solution

If we want to try it ourselves, we can copy the code above into an online 
Common Lisp compiler. The one I linked is in CLISP, but it gets the job done.

Alternatively, as mentioned before, we can download a copy of Steel Bank 
Common Lisp as well as a copy of the solution. Assuming SBCL is in the path, 
we can run a lisp file like a script as follows:

```
sbcl --script hello-world.lsp
```

And, that should produce the “Hello, World!” string on the command line.

---

#### References

{% include blog_reference.md reference="grifski_hwlisp_2018" %}
